{title About our series}

This series of lessons describes the fundamentals of the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī},
the core text of the Pāṇinian school of Sanskrit grammar. Our series has been
written for a general audience and assumes no prior knowledge of Sanskrit. That
said, this series will be more useful and accessible to you if you know some
Sanskrit already.

If you want a more general and beginner-friendly introduction to Sanskrit
grammar, please use our {url[r=guide.index] grammar guide} instead.


{h Origins of the Pāṇinian school}

The {dfn Vedas}, the oldest of all Sanskrit compositions, have been passed down
through a continuous oral tradition that is thousands of years old.

As time passed and cultures changed, six disciplines called the {s-dfn
vedAGga} evolved to protect the Vedas in their structure and function. There is
{s-dfn zikSA}, the study of speech sounds and their correct pronunciation;
{s-dfn chandas}, the study of meter and poetic form; {s-dfn nirukta}, the
study of etymological interpretation; {s-dfn jyotiSa}, the study of
timekeeping and the stars; {s-dfn kalpa}, the study of correct ritual; and
{s-dfn vyAkaraNa}, the most prestigious of the six, which is the study of
grammar and linguistic analysis.

Though there have been many schools of {s vyAkaraNa}, there is only one that is
truly pre-eminent. That is {s-dfn pANinIya-vyAkaraNa}, the tradition of the
grammarian {dfn Pāṇini}. Pāṇini lived sometime around the 5th
century BCE, and we know little about his life beyond that. But what we {em do}
have is the system he developed and perfected. Pāṇini's treatment of Sanskrit
is so thorough and so precise that no older schools of {s vyAkaraNa} survive;
evidently, they were no longer worth retaining.


{h The eight chapters}

The core of the Pāṇinian system is the {dfn {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī}} ("the eight
chapters"), a system of around 4000 rules divided into eight major chapters.
Together, these rules generate grammatically valid Sanskrit expressions. And if
an expression is {em not} grammatically valid, then it cannot be generated by
the system of rules.

In other words, we can say that the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} defines a {dfn generative
grammar} for Sanskrit. And it does so by defining a formal language to specify
the various substitutions of sounds, words, and sentences that Sanskrit
requires. In some sense, the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} is the first program.

The {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} is so comprehensive that essentially all later Sanskrit
literature is consistent with its model of Sanskrit. Perhaps Pāṇini's greatest
achievement is that he "froze" Sanskrit and preserved the form it has today.


{h Why study the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī}?}

The {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} has an obvious appeal to anyone who is intellectually
curious. If you are interested in linguistics, mathematics, computer science,
information theory, philosophy of language, Indian intellectual traditions, or
all of the above: welcome! Feel free to skip to the next section below.

There is also an obvious appeal to those who want to preserve traditional
Indian practices and knowledge systems. If this applies to you, we think you
should proceed in the traditional way and find a teacher, perhaps through the
classes from {a[href=https://www.sanskritfromhome.org] Vyoma-Saṃskṛta-Pāṭhaśālā}.

Otherwise, the common-sense reason to study the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} is that 
it will improve your Sanskrit. But is that actually true?

It's true if you are an advanced learner who wants to understand subtle points
of usage and become an authority on correct Sanskrit. Then the {cite
Aṣṭādhyāyī} will be of tremendous value to you.

But for beginning and intermediate learners, we do not think that studying the
{cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} will meaningfully improve your Sanskrit. Research on second
language acquisition is clear: we acquire proficiency in a language by hearing
or listening to meaningful content. Engaging with meaningful content is much
more important, and much more effective, than studying grammar rules. (See our
{url[r=site.resources] resources page} for tips on where to find such content.)


{h Entering the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī}}

The {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} is exceptionally difficult to understand without help.
This is for several reasons:

{ul
    {li It follows the {dfn sutra} style, which is aphoristic, terse, and only
    truly accessible through expert commentaries. (The advantage of the sutra
    style is that its texts are compact and easier to memorize.)}

    {li It uses highly technical Sanskrit that is more like a computer program
    than a piece of natural language. Even someone fluent in Sanskrit will
    struggle to understand it.}

    {li Many of its core rules are mutually dependent; to know one, we must
    understand the other.}
}

It is only natural, then, that an entire tradition of Sanskrit commentaries has
arisen to make the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} accessible. Even so, the true beginner
finds these texts complex and overwhelming. And of course, they presume a
thorough knowledge of Sanskrit.

There are also translations and non-Sanskrit commentaries available. But these,
too, are often too complex to be useful to the novice. And the various popular
resources are often too vague or basic to say anything useful about how the
system really works.


{h Our approach}

The {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} constantly raises fascinating theoretical questions. But
at its core, it is a practical system that serves a practical need: to decide
which expressions are valid Sanskrit and which are not.

Our approach is likewise a practical one that builds up the Pāṇinian system
from scratch. Each lesson starts with a specific problem that we need to
address. Then, the lesson introduces the specific rules and concepts that the
Pāṇinian system uses to solve the problem. By solving one problem, we often
catch sight of another, which we address in the next lesson. In this way, we
work through the system as a whole.

Our series is split into different {dfn units}, each of which focuses on a
major component of Sanskrit grammar. Within each unit, we focus on different
functional areas of the text. We cover each area with enough detail to give a
useful sense of what it is like, but not in so much detail that the reader is
lost in minor exceptions.

Here is what the units ahead contain.

{ol
    {li We start with the problem of modeling different sounds and sound rules.
    In the process, we learn about some of the core devices that the {cite
    Aṣṭādhyāyī} uses to stay expressive and concise.}

    {li Once we have a clear high-level view of the system, we look at the
    principles of verb derivation. Starting from an initial set of semantic
    conditions, we apply the rules of the system to create complete words.}

    {li [ongoing] We then do the same for nominal derivation. We also take a
    detour into how the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} handles the semantics of sentences.}

    {li [planned] Then we do the same for compounds.}

    {li [planned] Finally, we look at the two major classes of stem suffixes:
    root ({s kRt}) and nominal ({s taddhita}) suffixes.}
}


{h Our hopes for this series}

For those who want to deeper their Sanskrit knowledge, we hope our series will
provide a smooth and useful entrance into the world of {s vyAkaraNa}. Readers
who finish our series will be ready to explore the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} on their
own with the help of a good commentary.

For those who are curious about the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī} itself, we hope our
series will reveal the core of the system and give you a sense of how its
ancient creators approached the ideas of word and language.

Not everyone can master the {cite Aṣṭādhyāyī}, but everyone can appreciate its
profound and ingenious design. As a final thought, we hope that our series will
make it easier than ever to do so.
